Rules
See also: Rules of chess

A standard game of 5D Chess begins with an ordinary chess setup, starting on White's turn. The game has the original two axes from standard chess and two additional axes of movement:

    The x-axis from standard chess, which is notated using the letters a through h for the eight files.
    The y-axis from standard chess, which is notated using the numbers 1 through 8 for the eight ranks.
    The turn axis, displayed horizontally. It represents the progression of time, going from left to right.
    The timeline axis, displayed vertically. It represents movement between timelines.

All four are considered dimensions, and pieces can move through combinations of dimensions. In this display, the vertical directions of the timeline axis are opposite for each player, but the horizontal directions of the turn axis are the same. Each point in time in each timeline is displayed as an individual board. A distance of one space corresponds to a distance of one square horizontally, one square vertically, one turn, or one timeline. Each player takes their turn by making a move or series of moves and then pressing the "Submit Moves" button. All pieces retain their movement abilities from standard chess. In addition, their movement abilities are generalized across the turn and timeline axes.[3] The moves of the pieces are as follows:

    The rook may move any distance along exactly one axis.
    The bishop may move any distance along exactly two axes equally.
    The queen may move any distance along any number of axes equally.

When moving, the rook, bishop, and queen must move through a continuous series of unobstructed squares.

    The king may move one space along any number of axes. Castling is permitted but not generalized across turns and timelines, nor is the prohibition of castling out of or through check.[a]
    The knight may move in a pattern of two spaces along one axis and then one space along another axis. It is not required to move through unobstructed squares when moving; it may "jump" past obstacles in the way, including missing boards.
    The pawn may move one space forward along one axis to a vacant square. Forward movement is considered to be in the upward direction, along the y-axis or the timeline axis. On the pawn's first move, it may move two spaces forward through two vacant squares along one axis. The pawn may capture onto an opponent's piece forward along either of the following sets of axes: the x- and y-axes, or the turn and timeline axes. When a pawn reaches its last rank, it is promoted to a queen; it cannot be promoted to any other piece. The en passant capture is permitted but not generalized across turns and timelines.

A player may make a move only on a board where it is their turn. A move is considered to be made on a board if the piece making the move begins and/or ends its move on that board. If a player makes a move on a board, then the resulting position is created as a new board, one half-turn to the right; the original board itself remains unchanged. The new board is on the opponent's turn. A board is outlined in the color of the player whose turn it is on that board.

A timeline consists of a series of boards in the same horizontal row. If a board is the latest board on its timeline, then the board is considered to be playable, indicated by a thick outline; otherwise, it is considered to be unplayable, indicated by a thin outline. A player may make a move only using a piece that stands on a playable board. If a piece's move occurs on a playable board, then the resulting new board is created on the same timeline.

A piece may travel through time using its movement abilities. If a player makes a move such that a piece travels to an unplayable board, then a new timeline is created in the direction of the player, downward from that player's perspective, in the vacant row closest to the originating timeline; the resulting new board is placed on the new timeline. A piece may move between timelines. When a piece travels between boards, only boards outlined in the player's color are considered; boards outlined in the opponent's color are ignored.[4][2]

A timeline can be considered active or inactive. The original timeline is active. The nth timeline created by a certain player is active if the opponent has created at least n - 1 timelines. (In other words, given the order in which a timeline was created by a certain player, that timeline is active if the number of timelines created by the opponent is at least one less than that order.) All other timelines are inactive. Because of this, the maximum number of active timelines a player can have branched is one more than the number of timelines that the opponent has branched. An active timeline is shown with a purple arrow, whereas an inactive timeline is shown with an arrow in the color of the player who created it. An active board is a playable board on an active timeline.

The present line is a large vertical bar that always aligns itself with the active board which is the furthest left along the turn axis. The present line also touches every board in the same column as that board. Every board touched by the present line is considered to be in the present. On a player's turn, they must make moves until the present line shifts to being on their opponent's turn. The player may also optionally make moves on any playable board where it is their turn. The player may undo any moves made during their turn prior to the end of that turn. The player's moves are finalized and the turn is complete when the player submits their moves.

A player is in check in a situation where it is the player's turn and, if the player were to pass their move on all active boards in the present, then the opponent would be able to capture one of the player's kings. A player cannot take their turn in a way that would allow one of their kings to be captured. If the player whose turn it is has no way to legally complete their turn, then the game ends in one of two ways:

    If the player is in check, then they are in checkmate, and they lose.
    Otherwise, the game ends in a stalemate, resulting in a draw.